hey this is presto Walker in honor of
President's Day I want to share how
George Washington and Abraham Lincoln
understood the value of mathematics
here's a quote from George Washington
without arithmetic the common affairs of
life are not to be managed with success
the study of geometry and the
mathematics would do regard to the
limits of it is equally advantageous I
previously shared a story about Abraham
Lincoln which I'll summarize here
Lincoln paused his lost studies to learn
what it meant to demonstrate a proof he
found his answer by studying the
geometry books of Euclid's elements an
ancient Greek textbook so whatever you
think about the following homework
problems you should appreciate their
historical value these manuscripts have
survived hundreds of years and they show
math problems then are remarkably
similar to math problems today so both
of these problems involve calculating
simple interest here's a problem when
George Washington was about thirteen
years old if 100 pounds gains six pounds
in 12 months
how much would 75 pounds gain in the
same time now you should also use pounds
shillings and pence to write your answer
where 20 shillings is equal to a pound
and 12 pence is equal to one shilling
you should not write your answer in
fractional pounds because they used
pounds shillings and pence in his
homework now here's a problem from
Abraham Lincoln at about age 16 if 100
dollars in one year gains three and a
half dollars interest what sum will gain
thirty eight point five dollars in one
year and a quarter can you figure these
problems out give them a try and when
you're ready keep watching the video for
a solution
so let's first tackle George
Washington's homework he did the
following calculation essentially he did
75 times the interest rate of 6 per 100
pounds so 75 times 6 is equal to 450 and
this should be divided by a hundred now
100 goes into 450 four times evenly and
then we have a sort of remainder of 50
over a hundred so how do we deal with
this fractional amount of a pound so he
dealt with this 50 over a hundred as
half a pound and as there are 20
shillings in a pound there will be ten
shillings in half of a pound so the
answer then became four pounds and ten
shillings
now let's heckle Abraham Lincoln's
homework so he first converted all the
units of time to months a year is 12
months and a year and a quarter is 15
months he then essentially equated
proportions the interest earned per
dollar per month is the same in both
cases so in one case we have three
dollars and fifty cents divided by a
hundred dollars in twelve months and in
the other case that we're trying to
solve we have an interest of $38.50
divided by the sum that we want and
divided by fifteen months so we can
rearrange this expression to solve for X
so this will be 100 times twelve times
thirty eight point five all divided by
three point five times 15 so Abraham
Lincoln multiplied the numbers at the
top and the numbers at the bottom so the
numerator become
forty six thousand two hundred and the
denominator is fifty two point five he
then did the division and got the
correct answer of eight hundred and
eighty dollars did you figure these
problems out thanks for watching this
video please subscribe to my channel I
make videos on math you can catch me on
my blog mind your decisions if you like
this video you can check out my books
which are listed in the video
description and you can support me on
patreon you can email me presh at mind
your decisions calm if you have a math
topic or puzzle suggestion and you can
catch me on social media either at mind
your decisions or a pressure Locker